Why my reactions feel bigger than the moment,
understanding toxic stress.
Sometimes,
my reactions don't match what's happening around me,
at least
that's how it looks from the outside.
You might see me get angry quickly,
walk away,
or completely shut down.
It might seem like I'm overreacting
or choosing not to listen.
But it doesn't feel like a choice to me.
My brain has learned to stay on alert.
When you've been through a lot of stress,
especially over a long time,
your body gets used to being ready for something to go wrong.
Even when things are calm,
that feeling doesn't just switch off.
There's a part of my brain called the amygdala.
It's there to spot danger and keep me safe.
The problem is,
mine reacts really fast,
sometimes too fast.
So before I've had time to think about what's actually happening,
my body has already decided I'm not safe.
My heart starts racing,
my breathing changes,
everything feels tense.
That's my stress response kicking in.
Fight,
flight,
or freeze.
You might see fight as anger or aggression.
Flight might look like me leaving,
avoiding,
or refusing,
and freeze.
That's when I just shut down.
In those moments,
the thinking part of my brain,
the prefrontal cortex,
goes quiet.
That's the bit that helps me make decisions,
understand consequences,
and process what you're saying.
So when you're asking me to explain myself,
calm down
or think about my behavior.
I probably can't,
not because I won't,
because I can't.
There's also something else going on.
My brain remembers things,
even when I'm not thinking about them.
A tone of voice,
a look,
a situation that feels familiar.
The hippocampus links those things to past experiences,
and suddenly my body reacts like it's happening again.
That's why something small can feel really big.
It's not just about now,
it's about everything my body has learned before.
There's a hormone called cortisol that gets released when I'm stressed.
For me,
that system has been used a lot,
so it doesn't take much to trigger it.
You might see me struggle to focus,
act impulsively,
or get overwhelmed quickly.
That's not about being difficult.
That's what toxic stress does over time.
What really makes a difference
is how you respond.
If voices get louder,
if things feel unpredictable,
or if I feel judged or controlled,
my brain hears that as more danger,
and everything escalates.
But when you stay calm,
when your voice is steady,
when you give me space instead of pressure,
something changes.
My body starts to settle.
I might not show it straight away,
but I feel it.
That's called co-regulation.
I'm borrowing your calm because I don't always have my own yet.
Over time,
that helps me learn how to manage things differently.
You don't need to fix everything for me,
but you do need to understand what's happening underneath,
because what looks like behavior
is often survival.
And when I start to feel safe,
really safe,
that's when I can think,
learn
and begin to trust.